So what is Robo-advising?
Well, it's as it sounds like,
it's basically a robot
that gives you advice.
It's an app that takes
the place of a human
financial advisor.
As such, it can handle
the logistics of
your finances like show
you all your accounts
in your bank,
in your stocks, in
your mutual funds,
and it can show you
other things that you hold,
it can present all your finances,
it can help you facilitate
transfers between accounts,
it can help you pay your bills,
and deliver money elsewhere.
So a robo-advisor is
a logistical help-mate that
you'd have on your phone.
That's all true
and that's useful.
But really think about
what robo-advising is
doing for you that's
adding significant
value to your life.
It's not really those logistics
that are the main
source of value.
As you see, the
real value added by
a robo-advisor is in
helping you achieve
your financial goals,
helping directing your savings to
investment vehicles that are
appropriate for your goals.
So in this module,
we're going to cover
the building blocks of
robo-advising and it's going to
focus on this biggest piece here,
how robo-advisors deliver
high impact investment advice
and at a high volume to a lot
of people at once
and at low cost.
So to understand how
robo-advising adds value,
it's worth just rewinding
a little bit back a few
decades to how it used to be.
We think about how it used to be,
rich people would have
investment portfolios and they
would have investment advisors.
So they'd be managing
this portfolio
of their money for themselves,
for their kids, for the long run,
for their retirement, and so on.
Then, other people,
they wouldn't have
financial advisors,
they wouldn't even really
be saving for their
retirement so much.
Back in the day, when
I say back in the day,
I'm talking about
40 years ago, 50 years ago.
If you showed up at your job,
you wouldn't be signing
your 401k plan like you
did picking mutual funds.
Instead, you would
be told, "Well,
here's how it's going to
happen for your retirement.
Here's how it's going to happen."
You have what we call a
defined benefit plan.
When you reach retirement age,
you're going to retire.
At that point, we're
going to count
up your years of service,
we're going to multiply
by that number say
two percent and then
we're going to take that,
and we're going to
multiply that by something
like the last salary you earned,
something like that, your
average salary over
the last years.
Some formula like that.
We're going to
calculate that formula,
that's going to tell us
an annual pension and
then that's what
you're going to get.
That's what you're going to get,
you're going to stop working for
your working wage
and now you're going
to trigger into retirement.
At this point, you're just
going to get that pension that
is this defined formula
of the money you've made.
So this is how it used to be.
It's just 40-50 years
ago when you weren't
thinking about how am I going
to save for retirement
for the most part.
Maybe you're worried a little bit
but for the most part you're
thinking that's taken care of.
I do what I do.
If I'm making cars
or I'm teaching
a class or I'm steel worker
whatever it is,
I do my thing,
I do my job,
I try to do that well and
then the whole
financial question of
how is retirement
going to be paid for,
that's being handled by
financial professionals
off-screen.
So that's how it was but
you don't have to read
the news very far
to see that benefit
came at a big cost.
So it's not just magic
that the money is going to be
there when it's time to retire.
In fact, the employer
has to stick
to a schedule of making payments
into a pension fund
and then has to
see to it that that money
grows to the level
that's needed so that
the assets of the pension fund
are sufficient for
the liabilities,
the liabilities being
the pension payments
that they have to make to
the people who've retired.
As you can see, if you just read
the paper offline
after this course,
take a look at what's
happened around the country
with pension plans
particularly municipal, state,
and other government
pension plans where
the money paid into
the plans really
wasn't sufficient
to meet this goal.
They were relying
on rates of return
that they thought
they were going to
make but then they didn't make
them and when they
didn't make them,
well the money just wasn't there.
So this is going on right now.
It's the biggest political
story in the country.
Really when you get down to
especially at the state level,
it comes up every time,
what are we going to do?
What are we going to do about
the solvency of
the pension plans?
Look at what happened in Detroit.
If you worked for
the Detroit government
all those years and
you're looking forward
to your pension,
well, Detroit went in
and out of bankruptcy.
Coming out of
bankruptcy, you're not
getting quite what you thought
you were going to get.
How about the auto workers?
The auto workers at
GM and Chrysler.
Once again, they had
to take a haircut,
they had to take less than
they were supposed to
get because the money
just wasn't there.
Look at Puerto Rico.
Look what's going
on in Puerto Rico.
The enormous liabilities in
Puerto Rico and
everyone is fighting
over the assets and if you
are looking forward to
a pension after a lifetime
of teaching in Puerto Rico,
you should be worried.
You should be worried,
the money just isn't there.
So you have to,
when you think about defined
benefit plans,yes
it sounds great.
In theory, if I'm an autoworker,
I'm not a finance expert,
I never said I was,
I never wanted to
think about that.
I wanted the employer to
take that off my hands.
But then that doesn't
have to work out.
It doesn't have to work out.
When it doesn't, it's not
even clear what you do.
So these days, we were
transitioning out of
those defined benefit plans
into today's world of what
we call defined
contribution plans.
That's the distinction benefit
versus contribution used to be.
There was a promise there,
you're going to
get this benefits.
So it's what happens at
the end that's defined.
These days, who knows
what you're going to
have at the end there?
What's defined as how much
you're putting into the plan?
So for the most part,
for most of you,
you're probably looking
at a 401k plan.
401k plan, this is
where the tax code is
encouraging this do it
yourself retirement savings.
So think about my paycheck,
your paycheck, at
the end of the month,
money is taken out of
my paycheck and pre-tax,
that's the tax encouraging this.
It comes at pre-tax,
goes into the mutual funds
that I chose for that money
to go to and then
my employer also pitches
in some money too.
All that money goes
into the mutual funds
and then hopefully it grows,
it doesn't have to grow.
it didn't grow yesterday, okay,
but hopefully it generally grows
and then when I reach retirement,
I've got my social security
but on top of that,
wherever this ends up,
that's what I've got.
So that do it yourself
retirement savings is
just the way we live now.
That's what's standard.
So getting back to robo-advisors.
If you think about where is
the place that they're
really creating the value,
that's really the oxygen
for this whole field,
it's in helping people with
these big financial decisions
they now have to make,
they didn't use to have to
make them, but now you do.
Now, do it yourself
retirement savings were
just about everybody and these
are people who don't
know any more than they
used to about this field
that that's not their field.
So it's crucial to
help these people save
intelligently for retirement to
help them come up with
an investment plan,
help them stick to it,
and also to show them
the range of outcomes
that they can expect.
So that's going to be
the focus of this module here,
to talk about how it is that
these apps are
accomplishing this goal.
How is it that they are coming
up with the advice that
they are providing
to their clients,
that is creating the book
of the value of these apps.
What are the investment
products that
the apps depend on and
how do those work,
and then we can also talk
a little bit about how,
with a big data approach,
these robo-advisors can customize
the advice they're
giving to the client.